Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to learn how to hash user passwords now right away, you're probably wondering
what in the world does that mean?
Well, to answer this, let's jump in to our Mongo DB Atlus account.
Remember, you can just go to Mongo DB dot com and then sign in from the collection screen within our
complex app database, within the user's collection.
Remember, this is where we have one document per user and each document has different fields like username,
email and password.
Now you'll notice that we're just storing their actual password value in plain, simple text.
This is a bad practice because worst case scenario, if our database was ever compromised or attacked
or leaked, well, then we would be revealing the user's actual password value.
And a lot of people use the same password for every app or service that they use.
So with great power comes great responsibility.
If users are trusting us with potentially the same password that they also use for their email account
or their banks website, we want to be careful to set things up so that even in a worst case scenario,
even if our database was leaked to an attacker, we would still not be revealing their actual password
values.
So what we can do is when a user registers for our app and they choose a password, we can hash that
password value within our note server and then we can store that hash value in our database.
Hashing a value just means converting it into a different value.
So, for example, if a user registered and typed this in as their password, we can hash that and then
this would be the hash value and that is what we would actually store in our database.
The reason this is a good idea is because harshing is not the same thing as encrypting.
When you encrypt a value, that implies that it can be decrypted, right.
So encryption and decryption is a two way street.
However, hashing a value is a one way street.
I've heard people use the following metaphor with hashing.
It's as if someone wrote a value down on a piece of paper and then you burned that piece of paper into
ashes so you can convert paper into ash.
But we can't go back.
There's no way to convert those burnt ashes back into that original piece of paper.
That's what hashing is like.
So for this security password situation, it's the perfect fit.
Even if an attacker somehow got access to our database, all they would see for the password are these
hash values.
Cool.
Now, before we get started actually implementing this hash feature.
Let's begin by deleting all user documents that are currently in our database.
Right, because we want a fresh start with only secure hashed password values in our database.
So in Mongo DB Atlas, if you hover over a user document, you'll see this trash can symbol in the top
right corner of it.
Go ahead and click that and just delete any sample or test users that you've created so far.
Cool, so now that our users collection is empty, once again, let's implement a hashing feature.
So jump into your text editor and I want you to jump in to our uppercase User Digest model file in our
user model file within the register function.
This is where we can convert their password into a hash value.
Now, before we actually set this up, we need to go out to the JavaScript grocery store or NPM and
pick up a package that will handle that converting or hashing for us.
So open up your command line.
If your server or app is already running, you can press control, see to stop it and run this command
with me, npm install.
And in the JavaScript world, there's a very popular hashing package named B Creped J.
It's all lowercase, all one word decrypt JS.
All right, go ahead and press enter.
OK, now that we've installed that package, we can go ahead and tell our server to begin running again.
So npm run watch.
OK, now up at the very top of our user model file, let's require in that new package.
So new line let's say const and call it B creped and let's set that to equal and then just required
in so require in the name of the package was B Creped J.
Yes.
All right, so now let's go leverage B creped down in our register function.
So scroll down in the user model until you find this area that begins User Prototyp Dot Register.
All right.
Now, there's no sense wasting our servers, processing power, converting a password into a hash unless
there's no validation errors with the user's inputted data.
So within this if statement that says only if there are no errors or in other words, right above this
line where we say users collection, insert one right above that, let's add a new line and we can write
a comment to ourselves to stay organized.
We can say hash user password and using decrypt is a two step process.
So first, we want to create something called a salt.
So let's say let salt equal and then we use the B Creped package to call a method named Jen Salt Sync.
Within these parentheses, let's include a value of ten.
Anyways, once we've generated the salt now we can actually generate the hash.
So below this line we want to overwrite the user's password value.
So let's say this data dot password equals and then we use the decrypt package and we call a method
named hash sync.
We give this method to arguments.
So a comma B as placeholders.
The first argument is the value that you want to hash.
So this would be the password that the user just tried to type in this dot data dot password.
And then the second value is your salt value.
So we created a variable named Salt and now we are good to go right, because this data is what's getting
stored as a document in the database.
And we just updated the password value within this DOT data.
So let's save this file and take it for a test drive.
So back on our website, let's try to register as a new user.
So user name Brad.
Brad at Brad dot com for my password I will choose quarte quarte.
OK, let's sign up.
Congrats, there are no errors.
Now let's go look in our Mongo DB Atlus account within our users collection, we can click fine to reload
the latest data.
Awesome.
So now in our database, look what's being stored for the password value.
Even if an attacker somehow got access to our database, this hash value is of no use to them.
This means we have successfully protected our users passwords.
However, we do still need to update our login function.
What I mean by this, if we go back to our app, back to the home page, when a user tries to log in
and we are comparing the password that they are trying to log in with, with the actual password in
the database, well, we need to change how that comparison works now that we are storing a hash value.
Let me show you what I mean.
So back in our text editor within our user model that scroll up and find the login function.
So it begins with User Prototyp Log in and remember, we set up this if statement to see if the login
should be successful or not.
So the first condition is to see if the user name that they're trying to log in with actually matches
a user in the database.
And then for the second condition, we are checking to see if the password stored in the database double
equals sign or matches the password that the user just tried to log in with.
Well, when it comes to the password value that is stored in the database, now that we are storing
a hash value, this is never going to evaluate to true right.
If the user tries to log in with corty Cordie, that's not going to equal that long hash value.
So for this second condition, this part that comes after the ampersand ampersand, we need to use the
B creped package to compare values.
So let's delete beginning right after the ampersand ampersand and delete until the closing parentheses,
right after this dot data dot password instead.
Let's use the decrypt package and we want to call a method that it has named compare sink.
We give this method to arguments so we could say a comma B as placeholders for the first argument.
Let's include the password that the user just typed in.
This would be something that is not already hashed.
So this dot data, dot password and then for the second value instead of B, this would be the hash
value from our database.
So attempted user dot password.
OK, so Decrypt is going to perform that same hashing operation on the password that they are trying
to log in with.
And then if it determines that's a match with this hash value, well then compare async is going to
return a value of true.
If they're not a match, it returns false.
So let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back in the browser, let's try to log in.
So username Brad first.
I'll type an incorrect value on purpose.
So if I log in with just a bogus value, we see invalid username password.
Cool.
But if I go back and use Brad and actually type the correct password of Quarte Keerthi.
And log in, awesome, we see congrats.
So as far as the users of our app are concerned, they have no idea that this hashing is even going
on.
They register with the password that they want.
They log in with that same password.
And all of this hashing just goes on behind the scenes.
It's the best of both worlds.
Users get to use whatever passwords they want.
And this way, even if our database is ever compromised, we're not leaking those actual passwords of
our users.
Now, before we bring this lesson to a close, I do want to cover one detail.
Let's jump in to our user model file, and I want you to dig into our validate function.
So it begins with user prototype dot validate.
This may not be the case any longer, but I know that in the past Decrypt had a maximum value limit
and once you crossed that limit, it would start truncating the value.
So what I'm getting at here is we would want to limit the maximum allowed password.
We'd want to change this now that we're using decrypt.
So previously we had the maximum password set to 100.
I'm actually going to change this to 50 now just for the sake of decrypt and its potential maximum limits.
So change that to 50 there.
And then towards the end of this line, we would change the customer message.
Password cannot exceed and then let's say 50 characters.
Cool.
Be sure to save that.
And that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
Now, I have some exciting news over the last few lessons.
We've been learning important best practices, but we haven't really been moving closer towards completing
the application.
Well, in our next lesson.
We are going to learn what it means to truly log a user in meaning if a user types in a valid username
and password into that login form, we don't just want to show them this message that says congrats.
We would want to show them the actual application.
So if they went back to the homepage you URL, we would need some way to determine that the current
request to this new URL is, quote, logged in.
And instead of showing them this guest registration page, we should show them a template that looks
like this big picture.
The idea is how do we really, quote, log a user in?
Meaning, how do we set up our server to be able to trust that subsequent requests after a successful
login should be trusted as that user?
This is where things get truly interesting.
I think this is going to be an aha moment for you.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.